+++
title = "Basics"
weight = 5
pre = "<b> </b>"
mathjax = true
+++

**Well Ordering Principle:** Every nonempty set of positive integers
contains a smallest member. (*Take is as an axiom*)

**Division Algorithm:** Let a and b be integers with b $>$ 0. Then there
exist unique integers q and r with the property that a $=$ bq $+$ r,
where 0 $\leq$ r $<$ b.

**Proof:** We begin with the existence portion of the theorem. Consider
the set S = {a - bk $\vert$ k is an integer and a - bk $\geq$ 0}. If 0
$\in$ S, then b divides a and we may obtain the desired result with q =
a/b and r = 0. Now assume 0 $\notin$ S. Since S is nonempty \[if a $>$
0, a - b . 0 $\in$ S; if a $<$ 0, a - b(2a) = a(1 - 2b) $\in$ S; a
$\neq$ 0 since 0 $\notin$ S\], we may apply the Well Ordering Principle
to conclude that S has a smallest member, say r = a - bq. Then a = bq +
r and r $\geq$ 0, so all that remains to be proved is that r $<$ b. If r
$\geq$ b, then a - b(q + 1) = a - bq - b = r - b $\geq$ 0, so that a -
b(q + 1) $\in$ S. But a - b(q + 1) $<$ a - bq, and a - bq is the
smallest member of S. So, r $<$ b. To establish the uniqueness of q and
r, let us suppose that there are integers q, q', r, and r' such that a =
bq + r, 0 $\leq$ r $<$ b, and a = bq' + r', 0 $\leq$ r' $<$ b. For
convenience, we may also suppose that r' $\geq$ r. Then bq + r = bq' +
r' and b(q - q') = r' - r. So, b divides r' - r and 0 $\leq$ r' - r
$\leq$ r' $<$ b. It follows that r' - r = 0, and therefore r' = r and q'
= q. $\blacksquare$

The greatest common divisor of two nonzero integers a and b is the
largest of all common divisors of a and b. We denote this integer by
gcd(a, b). When gcd(a, b) = 1, we say a and b are relatively prime.

**GCD is a linear combination:** For any nonzero integers a and b, there
exist integers s and t such that gcd(a, b) = as + bt. Moreover, gcd(a,
b) is the smallest positive integer of the form as + bt.

**Proof:** Consider the set S = {am + bn $\vert$ m, n are integers and
am + bn $>$ 0}. Since S is obviously nonempty (if some choice of m and n
makes am + bn $<$ 0, then replace m and n by $-$m and $-$n), the Well
Ordering Principle asserts that S has a smallest member, say, d = as +
bt. We claim that d = gcd(a, b). To verify this claim, use the division
algorithm to write a = dq + r, where 0 $\leq$ r $<$ d. If r $>$ 0, then
r = a - dq = a - (as + bt)q = a - asq - btq = a(1 - sq) + b(-tq) $\in$
S, contradicting the fact that d is the smallest member of S *(Note that
we wanted to show a - dq $<$ d which is obviously true as r $<$ d.)*.
So, r = 0 and d divides a. Analogously (or, better yet, by symmetry), d
divides b as well. This proves that d is a common divisor of a and b.
Now suppose d' is another common divisor of a and b and write a = d'h
and b = d'k. Then d = as + bt = (d'h)s + (d'k)t = d'(hs + kt), so that
d' is a divisor of d. Thus, among all common divisors of a and b, d is
the greatest.

**Corollary:** If a and b are relatively prime, then there exist
integers s and t such that as + bt = 1.

**Euclid's Lemma:** If p is a prime that divides ab, then p divides a or
p divides b.

**Proof:** Suppose p is a prime that divides ab but does not divide a.
We must show that p divides b. Since p does not divide a, there are
integers s and t such that 1 = as + pt. Then b = abs + ptb, and since p
divides the right-hand side of this equation, p also divides b.
$\blacksquare$

**Fundamental theorem of arithmetic (*to be proved later*)**: Every
integer greater than 1 is a prime or a product of primes. This product
is unique, except for the order in which the factors appear.

The least common multiple of two nonzero integers a and b is the
smallest positive integer that is a multiple of both a and b.

-2 mod 15 = 13 since -2 = (-1)15 + 13.

In general, if a and b are integers and n is a positive integer, then a
mod n = b mod n if and only if n divides a - b

**Example:** Consider the statement, "The sum of the cubes of any three
consecutive integers is divisible by 9." This statement is equivalent
to checking that the equation
$(n^3 + (n + 1)^3 + (n + 2)^3) \bmod 9 = 0$ is true for all integers n.
Because of properties of modular arithmetic, to prove this, all we need
do is check the validity of the equation for $n = 0, 1, \dots, 8$.

**Example:** We use mod 3 arithmetic to show that there are no integers
a and b such that $a^2$ - 6b = 2. To see this, suppose that there are
such integers. Then, taking both sides modulo 3, there is an integer
solution to $a^2$ mod 3 = 2. But trying a = 0, 1, and 2 we obtain a
contradiction.

**First principle of mathematical induction:** Let S be a set of
integers containing a. Suppose S has the property that whenever some
integer n $\geq$ a belongs to S, then the integer n + 1 also belongs to
S. Then, S contains every integer greater than or equal to a.

**Second principle of mathematical induction:** Let S be a set of
integers containing a. Suppose S has the property that n belongs to S
whenever every integer less than n and greater than or equal to a
belongs to S. Then, S contains every integer greater than or equal to a.

**Example:** We will use the Second Principle of Mathematical Induction
with a = 2 to prove the existence portion of the Fundamental Theorem of
Arithmetic. Let S be the set of integers greater than 1 that are primes
or products of primes. Clearly, 2 $\in$ S. Now we assume that for some
integer n, S contains all integers k with 2 $\leq$ k $<$ n. We must show
that n $\in$ S. If n is a prime, then n $\in$ S by definition. If n is
not a prime, then n can be written in the form ab, where 1 $<$ a $<$ n
and 1 $<$ b $<$ n. Since we are assuming that both a and b belong to S,
we know that each of them is a prime or a product of primes. Thus, n is
also a product of primes. This completes the proof. $\blacksquare$

**Example:** The Quakertown Poker Club plays with blue chips worth
\$5.00 and red chips worth \$8.00. What is the largest bet that cannot
be made?

To gain insight into this problem, we try various combinations of blue
and red chips and obtain 5, 8, 10, 13, 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25,
26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. It appears that
the answer is 27. But how can we be sure? Well, we need only prove that
every integer greater than 27 can be written in the form a \* 5 + b \*
8, where a and b are nonnegative integers. This will solve the problem,
since a represents the number of blue chips and b the number of red
chips needed to make a bet of a \* 5 + b \* 8. For the purpose of
contrast, we will give two proofs---one using the First Principle of
Mathematical Induction and one using the Second Principle. Let S be the
set of all integers greater than or equal to 28 of the form a \* 5 + b
\* 8, where a and b are nonnegative. Obviously, 28 $\in$ S. Now assume
that some integer n $\in$ S, say, n = a \* 5 + b \* 8. We must show that
n + 1 $\in$ S. First, note that since n $\geq$ 28, we cannot have both a
and b less than 3. If a $\geq$ 3, then n + 1 = (a \* 5 + b \* 8) + (-3
\* 5 + 2 \* 8) = (a - 3) \* 5 + (b + 2) \* 8. (Regarding chips, this
last equation says that we may increase a bet from n to n 1 1 by
removing three blue chips from the pot and adding two red chips.) If b
$\geq$ 3, then n + 1 = (a \* 5 + b \* 8) + (5 \* 5 - 3 \* 8) = (a + 5)
\* 5 + (b - 3) \* 8. (The bet can be increased by 1 by removing three
red chips and adding five blue chips.) This completes the proof. To
prove the same statement by the Second Principle, we note that each of
the integers 28, 29, 30, 31, and 32 is in S. Now assume that for some
integer n $>$ 32, S contains all integers k with 28 $\leq$ k $<$ n. We
must show that n $\in$ S. Since n - 5 $\in$ S, there are nonnegative
integers a and b such that n - 5 = a \* 5 + b \* 8. But then n = (a + 1)
\* 5 + b \* 8. Thus n is in S.

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/basic_2.png)

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/basic_3.png)

**Definition:** A partition of a set S is a collection of nonempty
disjoint subsets of S whose union is S

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/basic_4.png)

**Definition:** A function (or mapping) $\phi$ from a set A to a set B
is a rule that assigns to each element a of A exactly one element b of
B.

**Definition:** Let f: A → B and c: B → C. The composition cf is the
mapping from A to C defined by (cf)(a) = c(f(a)) for all a in A

**Definition:** A function f from a set A is called one-to-one if for
every a1, a2 $\in$ A, f(a1) = f(a2) implies a1 = a2.

Alternatively f is one-to-one if a1 $\neq$ a2 implies f(a1) $\neq$ f(a2)

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/basic_5.png)

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/basic_6.png)

*Note that 2nd and 3rd are very easy and straight forward to proof so
don't worry*
