+++
title = "Groups"
weight = 5
pre = "<b> </b>"
+++

**Definition:** Let G be a set. A binary operation on G is a function
that assigns each ordered pair of elements of G an element of G. This
condition is called _closure_.

The binary operations addition modulo n and multiplication modulo n on
the set {0, 1, 2, . . . , n - 1}, which we denote by $Z_n$, play an
extremely important role in abstract algebra.

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/groups_1.png)

Suppose we remove a square region from a plane, move it in some way,
then put the square back into the space it originally occupied. Our goal
in this chapter is to describe all possible ways in which this can be
done. More specifically, we want to describe the possible relationships
between the starting position of the square and its final position in
terms of motions. However, we are interested in the net effect of a
motion, rather than in the motion itself.

To begin, we can think of the square region as being transparent (glass,
say), with the corners marked on one side with the colors blue, white,
pink, and green. This makes it easy to distinguish between motions that
have different effects.

The eight motions $R\_0, R\_{90}, R\_{180}, R\_{270}, H, V, D,$ and $D'$,
together with the operation composition, form a mathematical system
called the dihedral group of order 8. _Note: Inverse of $R\_\alpha$, L is
$R\_{360 - \alpha}$, L resp. (L is a reflection)_

The analysis carried out above for a square can similarly be done for an
equilateral triangle or regular pentagon or, indeed, any regular $n$-gon
($n \geq 3$). The corresponding group is denoted by $D_n$ and is called
the dihedral group of order $2n$. It is often called the group of
symmetries of a regular n-gon.

A plane symmetry of a figure F in a plane is a function from the plane
to itself that carries F onto F and preserves distances; that is, for
any points p and q in the plane, the distance from the image of p to the
image of q is the same as the distance from p to q.

The symmetry group of a plane figure is the set of all symmetries of the
figure. Obviously, a rotation of a plane about a point in the plane is a
symmetry of the plane, and a rotation about a line in three dimensions
is a symmetry in three-dimensional space. Similarly, any translation of
a plane or of three-dimensional space is a symmetry. A reflection across
a line L is that function that leaves every point of L fixed and takes
any point q, not on L, to the point q' so that L is the perpendicular
bisector of the line segment joining q and q'. A reflection across a
plane in three dimensions is defined analogously.

Just as a reflection across a line is a plane symmetry that cannot be
achieved by a physical motion of the plane in two dimensions, a
reflection across a plane is a three-dimensional symmetry that cannot be
achieved by a physical motion of three-dimensional space.

To be sure that $D_4$ is indeed a group, we should check this equation
for each of the $8^3$ = 512 possible choices of a, b, and c in $D_4$. In
practice, however, this is rarely done! Here, for example, we simply
observe that the eight motions are functions and the operation is
function composition. Then, since function composition is associative,
we do not have to check the equations.

Be sure to verify closure when testing for a group.

Notice that if a is the inverse of b, then b is the inverse of a.

If a group has the property that ab = ba for every pair of elements a
and b, we say the group is Abelian. A group is non-Abelian if there is
some pair of elements a and b for which ab $\neq$ ba.

**Example:** The set of integers under ordinary multiplication is not a
group. Since the number 1 is the identity, property 3 fails.

**Example:** The set S of positive irrational numbers together with 1
under multiplication satisfies the three properties given in the
definition of a group but is not a group. Indeed,
$\sqrt{2} * \sqrt{2} = 2$, so S is not closed under multiplication.

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/groups_2.png)

**Example:** By Exercise 11 in Chapter 0, an integer a has a
multiplicative inverse modulo n if and only if a and n are relatively
prime (easy to prove, and a very important observation is that if
integer a has multiplicative inverse b, then we can as well say that a
is the multiplicative inverse of b and therefore b and n are relatively
prime). So, for each n $>$ 1, we define U(n) to be the set of all
positive integers less than n and relatively prime to n. Then U(n) is a
group under multiplication modulo n. (We leave it to the reader to check
that this set is closed under this operation (Proof: $at\_1 + nt\_2 = 1, bt\_3 + nt\_4 = 1 \Rightarrow abt\_1t\_3 + at\_1nt\_4 + nt\_2bt\_3 + n^2t\_2t\_4 \Rightarrow ab(..) + n(..) = 1$).) For n = 10, we have U(10) = {1, 3, 7, 9}.

**Example:** The set of integers under subtraction is not a group, since
the operation is not associative.

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/groups_4.png)

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/groups_5.png)

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/groups_6.png)

**Example:** The set {1, 2, . . . , n - 1} is a group under
multiplication modulo n if and only if n is prime (as each element must
possess an inverse).

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/groups_7.png)

The following three theorems were very easy to prove for me.

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/groups_8.png)

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/groups_9.png)

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/groups_10.png)

A consequence of the cancellation property is the fact that in a Cayley
table for a group, each group element occurs exactly once in each row
and column. **Proof:** Each element occurs at least once as suppose $M$
doesn't occur in column of $R$, its not possible as we have
$R^{-1}M =$ something (binary composition). Now to prove at most 1, we
have $RM = K$ and $RN = K \Rightarrow RM = RN \Rightarrow M = N$.

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/groups_11.png)

So we will unambiguously denote the inverse by $g^{-1}$

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/groups_12.png)

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/groups_13.png)

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/groups_14.png)

_Note: $ax = b \Rightarrow x = a^{-1}b$ which is unique as inverse is
unique_

Also, one must be careful with this notation when dealing with a
specific group whose binary operation is addition and is denoted by
"+"

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/groups_15.png)

So, $g^{-3}$ means $(-g) + (-g) + (-g)$ and is written as $-3g$.

As is the case for real numbers, we use a - b as an abbreviation for a +
(-b).

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/groups_16.png)

![image](/upsc/mathematics-optional/algebra/groups_17.png)
